# Say it like you mean it

Mini Kore has 19 letters (a b d e f g i j k l m n o p r s t u v).
All of the consonants (b d f g j k l m n p r s t v) are pronounced exactly the same as they are in English. Phew!

The vowels are pronounced like they are in Spanish, Italian, German, and many other languages:

    A — ah — father
    E — eh — met
    I — ee — eat
    O — oh - moment
    U — oo — moo

The only other pronunciation rule you need to know is that words are always stressed or emphasized on their second-to-last syllable:

    animale = ah-nee-MAH-leh, not ah-nee-mah-LEH
    veji = VEH-jee, not veh-JEE

Mini uses one word to mark the verb `(i)` and another to mark the object `(a)`.

The word `(e)` introduces adjectives and descriptive words, and works analogously to _a_. To say something **is good**, you say that thing **e bon**.

#### Examples

    [subject] i [verb] a [object]

    Mi i manja.
    I eat.

    Bob i manja a veji.
    Bob eats veggies.

    Man i bibe a vasa.
    A person drinks water.

    Bob i make a manja.
    Bob makes food.

    Mi i vasa a veji.
    I water the plants.

Notice that manja is used to mean both eat and food. This is how most words in Mini work: they describe a broad category of things and their precise meaning is only pinned down when you use it in a sentence.

---

Mini doesn’t really have a word for “is.” If you want to say that something is something else, you just use the word a to link the two items:

    [subject] a [noun]

    Bob a man.
    Bob is a person.

    Veji a manja.
    Vegetables are food.

In Mini, when a subject is followed by a [noun] that means the subject is that noun. No extra “is” is necessary.

---

The word e introduces adjectives and descriptive words, and works analogously to a. To say something is good, you say that thing e bon. Let’s see a few examples:

    [subject] e [adjective]

    Kosa e bon.
    The thing is good.

    Bob e vasa.
    Bob is wet.

    Manja e Bob.
    The food is Bob's.

Notice that the word vasa, which in the above examples meant water, here means wet, because the word is now being used as an adjective. And similarly the name Bob is now possessive because it’s being used as an adjective.

---

adjectives come before the noun like they do in English

    mega loke                 big place
    no mui kolo               not much color
    dika feo bebe             fat ugly baby

---

Adverbs (other than not) come after the verb

    Bob i manja rapi.         Bob eats fast.
    Bob i no manja mui rapi.  Bob does not eat very fast.

---

### pronouns

    mi   first person     I, me
    tu   second person    you
    si   third person     he, she, it, him, her
    mi-ale      we (me-all)
    si-ale      they

---

Prepositional phrases come after the words they describe in basically the same way as in English. If the phrase is describing the verb, it can go after the direct object.

    de      from, of, about, by, out of, made of
    en      in, at, on
    go      to, for, towards
    kon     with
    sama    like, as, than, same

    Bob e kon Alisa.                Bob is with Alice.
    Bob e de Amerika.               Bob is from America.
    Alisa i viva en London.         Alice lives in London.
    Da e go tu.                     That’s for you.
    Mi i toma go tu a kosa.         I take the thing to you.
    Mi e sama tu.                   I am like you.

---

Mini uses three conjunctions, which work basically the same as English

    an      and
    pero    but
    u       or, either

    Alisa an Bobi i pale mui.
    Alice and Bob talk a lot.

    Tu i vole a kafe u tea?
    Do you want coffee or tea?

    Mi i kamina en foreta, pero si i kipa en.
    I walk in the forest, but he stays inside.

---

In Mini, unlike English, the word ordering of questions does not change.

    Tu i ke?                        You what?
    Tu a ke (man)?                  Who are you?
    Tu e ke?                        How are you?
    Tu i go en ke tempo?            When (at what time) do you go?
    Tu i kipa go ke rason?          Why (for what reason) do you stay?
    Tu i manja a ke mui?            How much do you eat?
    Tu i vole uti a ke kosa?        Which thing do you want to use?
